So I'm just switching this on now Sue, so this is running.
This is running.
Are you OK there?
Mm hmm.
It ended up though.
Erm, erm, yeah just talking about the erm, the, did you ever go fishing in the reens
or anything like that?
Oh yes, yes.
From time, about four or five of you always had a jam jar with a string on it and went
for tadpoles because once the frogspawn was out, yes I used to do it with my children
and my grandchildren and er, yeah there were always things in the reen.
And here, er David growing up, they had flatfish, they had eels, er they even caught place in
the stream, amongst itch and children used to come out of town to fish on our bridges
and oh yeah, it was quite the thing.
So you, you, as a young girl, you know entering your teenage years, I've heard that erm,
the young farmers clubs around here was erm, like a marriage bureau in many ways.
Yes, we're all guilty of using it.
Because it's very quiet.
What did you do as a teenager here?
I mean where was the focus?
Was it Newport?
Was it Chepstow?
Was it Nash?
No, erm, you see there wasn't a local young farmers club.
We'd go into Newport to join the Beyslic and Hentless young farmers club and erm, we depended
on erm, David's cousins who had vehicles, er, who were quite a bit older than me and
they would take us.
The only other club was Maga and there was no way of getting there.
David, my husband, belonged to Maga.
And I spoke our lives to really, erm, we went to, erm, to Trudiga House to the convent to
And all our friends there were farmers daughters, so we would join young farmers and still be
all together.
And in fact, 70 years later we're all still together.
Same girls we were at school with, young farmers and all our lives.
So yes, it was erm, it got us out.
We took part in competitions all over the county, erm, there were the rallies, there
was drama, erm, public speaking quizzes and then you got to know young farmers from all
over Monmouthshire.
Erm, and there was always a dance every week somewhere or other.
Only this week there was a picture of the ballroom in the Westgate Hotel in Newport
and David and I were looking at it and saying, we went to balls there in our black ties and
sequin dresses and, erm, it was a wonderful organisation.
We went to hunt balls at the King's Head Hotel in Newport.
In those days when everything was, I suppose, totally different as we know it now, as a
child, erm, you see in 1950, oh, 53, 54, they decided to send the children from Nash School
to a newly opened Langstone Primary School.
So I was nine at the time and I was sent, and we were picked up by bus in the village,
all of us children at that age, sent to Langstone School.
Well, we started making friends over there and most of those were rural families.
So you got to know people there and I even moved on to the convent with one friend.
Erm, so it just seemed quite a small, although it was a large area physically, it didn't
appear to be to us as children because our parents knew most of the farming families
and we were all drawn in together and young farmers just seemed to be a culmination of
us all still being together.
And yes, I met David there at Magy Young Farmers, we had a, there was a dance, I believe
it was Redwick Hall when I first met him, and although we lived in the same villages,
Nash never seemed to come to Whitsun and Goldcliffe and vice versa.
You see, we had our own vicar at Nash and Whitsun and Goldcliffe had their vicar who
lived in the vicarage here and it wasn't until 1953 that Nash was taken in.
Excuse the phone, it's just ringing.
So yes, and then things changed because the churches were brought together, people, we
formed social committees and so forth.
So I didn't know him even though we only lived three miles apart.
So it just didn't really mix with the other villages on the levels?
So you were saying for Redwick as well?
Well yes, we had family out in Redwick and we would, you see, only my father and Donald
and Dorothy Waters had a car in our village in Nash, they were only two cars.
Well you can't imagine life like that.
And yes, so people didn't drive around the villages.
So you said you had to finish policemen, did you have a, I'd like to know a bit more about
him, did you have a Finnish midwife?
No, no, but we had a lady who was a district nurse, not for this area, we had two in the
village, one on Broad Street Common, Nurse Griffiths, and one at Burned House in Nash,
Margaret Waters, but she was a district nurse in another area.
But there was a story that when Nurse Griffiths, when David was born, it was the winter of 1939
and it was one of the coldest winters apparently, and when he was born his mother brought him
home from the nursing home and he was very sickly and they didn't quite know what to do.
So Nurse Griffiths, now there were no cars, there was nothing, Nurse Griffiths came over
and they would have walked across fields in those days and she said to my mother and father
in law, you give me the baby, you bring him down, I'll look after him, otherwise he'll
die.
So that's what happened and she kept him for several weeks and kept him alive.
I don't quite know what was wrong and every night David's father, after he had milked,
put a sack around himself and he'd walk down to the common, which would be a little way
across the fields or round the road, whichever, and he said that he could hear the icicles
banging on the trees.
Anyway a couple of weeks later they brought the baby back.
So that was one experience that we know of where a district nurse kept her eye on everything.
But I remember my mother in law saying before her time even, they always had a midwife or
nurse to come and live in the farmhouses when the baby was due.
Really?
Yes.
She remembers her mother having for her siblings and obviously could remember being told all
that, told me.
Amazing.
So you said you went to the convent in Tredegar.
House, yes.
So I'm imagining it was a Catholic convent.
Yes.
So are you a Catholic?
No.
So why would you have gone there?
In those days we had a system of you had to pass your 11 plus exam to go to a grammar
school.
If you didn't you went to a secondary modern school.
And I guess my parents felt it might benefit me not going to a secondary school.
So it was a fee-paying school.
It was private.
They had a system that they would take Catholic children if they passed the 11 plus without
fees.
So a lot of families had the chance to go there who couldn't probably afford it otherwise.
I passed the entrance exam to go.
My father paid the fees.
I went along with, as I say, quite a few other farmers' daughters.
If you weren't clever that's what you did.
So what was it like?
Oh absolutely, absolutely brilliant.
Looking back how lucky we were.
There were only three, just under 300 children altogether.
And I don't know if you've ever been to Tredegar House, the National Trust place now.
Most of the school was open, all the rooms, I mean they've closed a lot off and you don't
see those these days.
But there were borders there.
I think there must have been 40 or 50 borders.
So you'd have service families sending their children there from abroad or, well they were
out in services.
And yes it's hard to describe.
The rooms were as they are.
They were in good condition and the nuns took it over.
Did you have a uniform?
Oh yes, yes.
Yes, navy blue and blue, dark blue.
It's not long ago I gave my school scarf to the exhibition in the house.
Really?
Yes, us old girls put an exhibition on in one of the classrooms of life as it was when
we were there.
Yes, we had nuns for most of the lessons but there were other teachers there besides.
There was nothing we couldn't do.
We had tennis courts, hockey pitches.
We used to have art classes in the gardens in the summer.
You'd sit on the wall by the lake and draw the lilies or sit in the garden and draw Sir
Briggs' memorial.
The Orangery as they call it now was our gym.
The gilt room was our art room.
All the nuns were pretty nice.
We had one or two that perhaps weren't so kind.
We had the brown room where all the carvings were.
We were told at the time it was by Gryndle and Gibbons but they say it might have been
his school but not him.
That was our music room and we had several grand pianos in there.
We would have music every week, theory of music.
Beautiful library underneath the stairs.
Which is no...
So why you received your schooling there?
Were you also schooled in the connections of Tredegar House and the estate with the
levels or was that something you learned after?
I suppose we grew up knowing that most of the farms in this area were owned by the Tredegar
estate and it was in the 50s that they had to sell them off because of what Evan had
done with the money and all the farmers round and about bought them at a very reasonable
price I understand.
I don't think the nuns went into any great detail about it.
I do remember and I've said this to some of the guides and I'm not sure they believe me
that I remember in the late 50s Olga, the French countess, coming to the school.
We were told to be on good behaviour and she came in a car, a chauffeur driven car, very
tall elegant woman and I often wondered if I dreamt it because nobody else seems to remember.
I'm curious.
But I remember her coming up the steps you see into the front hall, whether I happened
to be in the vicinity at the time I don't know.
But as you come into the house and you've got this big hall that was where we had our
assembly every day and Sister St. Brendan would stand on a big tall seat so she could
see over the top of us and we'd sing all the Catholic hymns before we went into our classes
and have prayers and pray for everybody that needed help or you know prayers for that morning
and we would disperse to our classrooms and before every lesson we said Hail Mary.
I can recite it now as quick as lightning.
Oh my goodness.
Do you remember what order they were, the nuns?
Yes, St. Joseph's.
St. Joseph's?
Yes because as it happened during that period my grandma owned Tearshift Farm which is the
Abbey Farm belonging to St. Joseph's at Lentarnham.
And our farm was on the same drive as theirs and when I was a little girl I spent all my
summers back and forth with my grandmothers and then of course when I went to the convent
they used our butcher shop for their all-in-meat because we were right against them.
So yes and I had a cousin who was head girl when I started the convent and she became
a nun there.
Really?
Yes.
Goodness.
So yes, St. Joseph's.
And of course they opened a nursing home there at Lentarnham and at that time my mother had
poor health and she used the nursing home quite frequently so I got to know the nuns
over there quite well.
Oh gosh.
Yes.
So presumably when you were going there were you going by bus or bike?
To the convent?
Yes.
Yes we'd catch the bus at Nash Arch just after eight o'clock.
You'd get into Newport and the bus station was in the centre opposite the market in those
days and we had three double-deckers all lined up with our name on it which we got on and
went to school and they parked in the driveway, not the front drive where the lodges are,
and we had a back drive and the buses pulled in and we would have to walk the whole end
of that drive to school then, no matter what the weather was like.
And I do remember once it had all been flooded that both lakes came over, the Red Lake and
the Big Lake, they met in the middle and we all had to walk through it.
Yes, I remember that.
So we started school then at twenty to ten, so it took us from, I don't know, twenty
to nine to twenty to ten to get from there and walk and assemble.
Yes.
So, and then the same thing, we finished school at quarter to four, got back into Newport
about half past four after you.
You know, it's a quarter of an hour, twenty minutes to walk up the drive.
So that's quite a bit, isn't it?
Yes, but it was, I suppose at the time we probably didn't enjoy school that much, but
it depended how good you were at things.
Looking back, I think we were very privileged, very privileged.
Do you know, as a child growing up in Nash, were you, do you remember what the wildlife
was like or were you aware of wildlife?
Oh yes, very much so.
Yes, because, you know, it was all under the, you know, under the farmer's jurisdiction,
wasn't it?
And we didn't have nitrogen and fertilizers and such.
Yes, I remember, perhaps, we didn't have rabbits in the village, you see, whereas now we've
got some leopards outside the door virtually every morning.
My daughter sees them feeding.
We've got a lot more wildlife here than there used to be when we were farming intensively.
But as a child, yes, we used to go looking for bird's nests.
We didn't used to take the eggs, but we knew where all the bird's nests were.
And if you were down the field, there'd be wasps and bees' nests and we had adders.
And my father used to, we had long grass in one of the orchards.
Father used to say, now don't you go down there, the snakes will bite you.
And we didn't used to listen.
So we got up one Sunday morning and there was this adder.
He'd, obviously it had been killed or dead or some reason or other, and he'd wormed
it round the plum tree as a warning to us.
Really?
Yeah.
But mind you, I'm never quite sure if it was a real adder or whether it was a grass snake
because we couldn't tell the difference as kids.
Yeah, owls, you always had owls hooting.
Yeah, I can't explain really.
But you were always aware of it.
Yeah.
Did you ever do things like fruit picking or...
Yes.
...things like that?
Well, when they were building the power station, we had this couple of orchards on the farm.
So my brother and I would pick all the plums and we'd set a stall up on the road outside
the, what you call it, the hedge.
And we'd put plums, tuppence a pound, and we'd sell every plum we could get.
Really?
Yes.
Oh.
It was brilliant.
How lovely.
You know, tuppence in those days was quite a lot for children.
Yeah.
And then in the autumn I used to pick loads of blackberries and we'd take them into the
butcher shop and they'd sell them for me.
Really?
And I'd get sixpence a pound.
Well, the butcher shop in Newport.
Yeah.
Yeah, you did things like that and all local farmers would sell their apples.
You could only keep so many.
Did your farm make cider or anything like that?
No.
Quite a few of the Waters family used to make cider.
I know.
Oh, there's lots of stories about the cider.
For another day perhaps.
Oh gosh.
Yeah.
Because you see it was such an industry down here.
What do you mean cider?
Cider, the villages were plastered with orchards all along the Severn.
Yeah.
And cider was a, you see, when you had men working for you back in the 1900s, you paid
them with cider and bread and cheese.
They didn't expect wages, a lot of them, if they just had food and shelter.
So cider was the drink.
I mean, you've got to imagine now there was no fresh water going back in the 1800s, haven't
you?
And everything was ale and cider.
And I assume that's why all the orchards were.
I mean, we had an orchard full of peri-pears.
So they were obviously making the peri-drink or the champagne or whatever they used them
for.
So lots of the orchards have gone?
Oh yes, yes.
I mean, this, where you've parked the car, opposite there's a big tract of land.
When I came here, that was a huge orchard, it's an acre and a half almost.
And the cows ruined that.
And we had four orchards here, all quite large.
So we had a couple of acres.
And did you have a press here?
Cider press?
No, no.
They used to, you see this cider press of Duthies used to travel around the village
and do it.
After that, when tractors and trailers came into being, they used to take them up to us
college and have the cider pressed up there.
Oh, right.
Yeah.
I'm not aware of anybody having a stone cider press in this area, except the one at Redwick
in the, that Hubert Jones renovated.
So we've got a mill wheel in the back garden.
And that obviously from a local mill, I would think.
But no, everybody had cellars with their cider barrels in them.
I can remember as a child.
Really?
Yeah.
Did you ever try it?
Yes.
You weren't meant to, but you did.
Elizabeth, my friend, we'd be sent down the cellar.
And these cellars were above ground mined.
We'd be sent and they built onto the house.
We were sent down the cellar to collect the cider for supper.
In what?
What would you collect?
Jugs.
You'd take a jug and they'd have a tap on the barrels.
And yeah, you'd have a little sample before you got to the back of the house.
It's a horrible mind when you're a child.
You don't enjoy it.
So that was normal.
Oh, yes.
Cider with supper.
Yes.
Yeah.
I can remember going to houses and having cider with supper.
Gosh.
And what, are there any other cider stories you alluded to that?
Well, you see, you always sort of gave the men cider.
I remember my mother, when we were children, and you'd always have a lot of people come
for haymaking look.
Every farmer did.
And she would have, we had what we called the tea basket.
And it was like this, really big.
And she'd fill it with food.
And then you'd have cider or something to take down for them to drink with it.
You didn't have orange squash in those days.
You didn't have pop, nothing.
And it was difficult taking tea because you didn't even have flasks, probably.
So cider was the answer to everybody's needs.
And we'd walk down the fields.
And I suppose we used to have to help her carry things that she didn't want on her arm.
Yeah.
So did you have much, I know we talked about this earlier, but so you growing up and living
on the levels or the moors, what's special about it?
What's different about it to somebody who's not from the area?
What could you say?
I wouldn't know.
That what you could say specifically.
I used to spend a lot of time with my friends at their farms as I was growing up in my teens
now, late teens, mid teens.
And it would be very difficult to pinpoint.
If you lived in a village, a village life was different, wasn't it, to living in a town.
I suppose we took everything for granted, you see, living on the levels.
That was just where you were.
I found it very funny because my friend lived at Deustoe House in Caldecott.
When I went up there, I was constantly ploughing up hills.
I used to think, oh, this is not so easy as living on the levels.
So I do remember that.
That's funny.
And they had a lot more trees up there.
I think there weren't that many trees down here of various varieties.
Oh, yes, there was ash everywhere.
And that's where, as you know, Nash got its name from.
No, I...
Was the ash used for anything in particular?
Was it a crop in any way?
I think I've read where they used to feed the cattle in the winter, holly and ash.
But I suppose there would still be the ash keys still on the trees in the winter.
I don't...
Not specifically.
It was just the grove of ash trees, wasn't it, Nash, was?
So on your land, say, now, when they was a child, would you know what reams and water
courses run through your land?
Would you know the names of them?
Yes, yes.
In fact, I've mapped most of the area with the reams, marked on them.
For future generations, that is, who...
It's one thing looking at a big map where you can barely read what's on there.
But I've detailed absolutely everything.
And I'm in the process of...
Oh, there are dozens to do, and I've only done perhaps four or five.
But it's still in the process.
Of the whole area?
Yeah, well, Goldcliff, Whitsun and parts of Nash.
Really?
Yes.
Has there been any surprises for you?
Do you have any favourites, any names you like?
Um, they all...
There's a reason why they're all called what they are, like Monkscroft just above us.
And Windmill Ream, as you can imagine.
I know Tony Pickup said something to me about Windmill Ream, and I said, which one do you mean?
Because there are several, you see.
All close to where the windmills were originally.
Yeah, Elver Pill, a lot of them are self-explanatory.
Ah...
Yes, when you're farming, you see, you've got to be able to know the names,
so that when you're talking to the drainage or the riverborders, as it once was,
you can tell them the name of the ream that you want cast, or something done to it.
There's no good just saying, I want that ream down there.
And do you know where the water runs, which direction it goes?
Yes, yes.
Like Parish Ream goes basically right round the parish.
And then we know where the outlets are, the gouts,
all the things that farmers should know,
where the intake of water comes out of the pill into our farm,
we've got sluices, and we know if we need to cast a ream,
the water isn't getting down to a certain part of the farm.
When you say cast a ream, what do you mean?
Oh, clean it out.
Oh, right, OK.
Yes.
I remember most of my younger life, before they had the ditches and machinery,
there were a couple of old gentlemen who used to clean the reams out
with their billocks and their various named instruments,
and they spent the entire summer doing that, well, under winter,
but you saw the difference in the summer.
I can see them out here now.
You can?
And they cut my Witson boss tree off one year and I was very cross.
Bill England, Alv Stevens, oh, Hubert Jones was another one,
and they would keep those reams as clear,
far better than they do with the machinery today.
You know, it's...
Who were they paid by?
Were they paid by...?
It was the river board in those days.
Yes, we pay a levy, you see.
I think we've just paid about £280 for natural resource whales now, it is,
and that's towards maintenance of our drainage system.
So, if they're managing that for you as farmers,
do you still have to keep an eye on it?
Oh, yes, because last year, for instance,
we've got a main ring called Wainbridge ring going right up through our farm.
They come with the ditcher, they cast it,
so then you've got, oh, 20, at least 20, 25 feet of spoil all over your grass,
just when you want to make silage or hay.
And that, if you take it right through the farm, adds up to several acres.
They go away, and we then have to get somebody to spread it, which costs.
Then you have to...
This year, our tractor went on fire.
We couldn't do what we normally do by rotivating it and breaking it down
and sowing the grass.
So we then have to pay for all that.
And this happens every other year that some ream or ditch needs to be done out,
and we have to bear the cost of it.
So they all, of the maintenance then, they pay for the ditcher to clean it out.
After that, it's our problem.
So when it was the internal drainage board, did a farmer have more of a voice?
Yes, yes, because the farmers were on there to represent the farmers.
OK.
And they knew exactly what should be done and how it should be done.
Yeah.
Since then, we have people who have no knowledge of our area.
They don't understand what we're talking about.
And we're having to put up with what we consider may eventually end up with floods,
because they're not taking any notice of the farmers.
So even though there is an advisory board now, that doesn't have as much...
Cloud, no, no.
I mean, Neville Water was... our cousin was on it.
And whilst he was on it, we knew that things were done according to spec as they should be.
And then when you lose people like that, who've also passed this knowledge down to others,
when you lose that, yeah, I think it's the end of an era personally.
See, that's what interests me, is this knowledge that's embedded within...
The local community, isn't it?
Because this whole water network is so curious to me that...
How do you pass that knowledge on?
Well, this is the sad part about it, because we had no sons.
And our daughters don't know what we know.
It's never interested them.
I shall leave my maps, and I hope one day they may be interested to look at them.
But I wasn't interested until latter years, I guess.
And suddenly you think, oh, well, we've told them where the feeding areas are,
and they must make sure how to feed the land from the pill.
Rick Turner was amazed when we showed him our noggle.
A noggle, it's a key we turn to let the water in from the pill to feed our farm.
Because if you don't turn it on here, on our bridge, there's hundreds of acres it feeds.
So you have to be so acutely aware of the conditions.
Yeah, so if we don't teach our girls after our days,
they won't be able to tell anybody else, will they?
So that's what's so special about this area, isn't it?
This part of its specialness is this water drainage system.
Oh, yes.
It's very...
I suppose it would be terribly complicated for a new person moving in, needing to know.
But you see, most of these farms are passed down.
People don't come in and buy these farms.
They just keep going.
So would you say most of the farms are several generations strong?
Oh, yes, yes.
I can't think of any that aren't, really.
Yes, you get people who come in and buy a few acres, perhaps 12 acres with a house.
That doesn't really count in my book.
What about the, you know, the putcher ranks that used to be out there?
Do you remember them?
Oh, gosh, yes, yes.
Which ones do you recall?
Well, mostly the ones at Goldcliff Point, and there were some at Porton.
I remember those.
Yes, when we were children, we'd come down...
I don't know.
I'm just wondering how we did come down.
We'd walk from Nash very often along the Seaball Bank.
Yeah, we did that on many occasions.
And then you'd have to come in and buy the pill and then get back out.
It was difficult, but we did it.
I suppose as we were growing up, I used to hear stories from my mother-in-law, who was
born at the hill, and they had a house there, not as it is today, obviously.
And Mr. Fennell owned the house, and he owned the fisheries.
And every summer, they would decamp from Newport.
They were quite wealthy people, and they would decamp to this house, bring the servants
as well.
And my mother and Nora, who lived with her family there, would...
You know, they were really good friends, and mother said they got that they were so fed
up with salmon by the end of the summer, because they had it for most meals.
Gosh.
Yes, and then there were stories about Eaton College having the salmon being sent up to
Eaton College once a year on the train for a big supper.
Yeah.
Did they own some land here?
Eaton College owned all the land around here after the Reformation and all of that period
in time.
Did they?
Yes, they owned all this land until the squires came in and bought...
Because it had been owned by monks?
Yes.
Of course it was taken over, wasn't it?
Yeah.
Oh.
Oh, yes.
I've got loads on that in my book.
Oh, goodness.
So, the putches, yes, we...
And then as we were here farming and so forth, you always went down and got several salmon
in a summer.
Did you?
Oh, yes.
And there was nothing.
The taste of a seven salmon, there is nothing like it.
We'd cook whole salmon and...
Wow.
Did you have a fishing kettle?
I've got one, yes, on my shelf.
Oh.
Yeah, so it was absolutely amazing.
This went on right up until the late 90s, 96, 97, when Adrian Williams' family bought
the fishery some while before...
I can't remember what year.
And yes, I've got pictures of him with the putches.
And of course, the Howells used to work for the fishing, whoever owned it.
I can remember old Mr. Howells making the putches even.
Really?
If I went down, sometimes you'd see him out on the shingle or in front of the shed, there,
making the putches.
Monica will tell you more about that.
I've got lots of pictures of him doing it.
Yes, it was part of, again, part of our village life, that everybody in the village had salmon,
if you could afford to buy it.
It wasn't a problem.
So you call it the Moors to you, Sue?
Yes, you live on the Moors.
Live on the Moors.
So we have the Caldecott and the Wentlewg levels.
Do you feel a connection with the Wentlewg side at all?
Only because we know some of the farmers through young farmers.
And again, we went to school with some of the farmers' daughters because they were just
close to the convent.
And again, they'd all come there if they failed the lemblers.
I think, I don't know what there was about farmers' daughters.
But that's what happened.
So we knew them through that, probably through markets and things like that.
But no, there's no real connection.
And when we did Flood 400 in 2007, we got together with St. Bride's Church and sort
visited and encouraged the commitment between us to do exhibitions.
And that's about where it finishes.
So you married.
When did you marry?
1964.
Did you get married at Nush?
Yes.
And so then you started your married life here at Whipson.
So your husband's family at Longtime Whipson, Bessargeant, is that right?
Yes.
Yeah.
And so are you able to tell me some of their stories?
Oh, yeah.
Yes.
Well, we're pretty sure this house, the barn especially, was built by the monks because
they had a grange and a moor barn, which is over on the common.
And these were the two biggest barns built down here.
And we know the monks owned all this area when they settled.
So the next thing we know for sure is that in the 1600s, David's mother's family were
living here.
And their name was Keane.
And we have their wills, copies of their wills, to prove where they were.
And they also owned land, which was extraordinary at that time.
They were yeoman farmers.
And it wasn't just this place.
They lived in, they were a huge family, and they lived in most of the farm houses in the
villages.
And I can trace exactly where.
Now, we know the Wartyces were here, I think it's 1500.
Neville's daughter, Catherine, she and I worked together on family history.
And there is something that tells us they were here at that time.
And it's quite likely when people's surnames were given them from the area and their livelihood,
that they were connected with the water somehow or other.
Then, looking back, the Wartyces originally, David's great, great, great, great, great,
great, great, great, great's grandfather lived at Castle Farm in Bishden.
And this was in the 1700s.
I must have put my other book.
He, he'd been to market to sell cattle.
On his way back to Castle Farm at Bishden, he was killed by a highwayman, and his money
was all stolen.
So, we know that, again, they were in this area, and then they moved into Nash.
But the other side of the family were Joneses of Tatton, and they'd been here again for
many hundreds of years.
I've got, you know, in the church registers, we can only go back to about 1750, 1760, and
they're all in there.
And I've done a family tree, which tells me who, who's descended from whom, where, and
when.
And that is encompassing the three parishes, which would make sense because they had no
transport.
But they had a lot of links.
You can see the Morgans of Tridiga have signed some of their marriage things in the registers.
There were the Baptisms, and there was another family, the Arneys and the Seys.
They were all people who had land and could write, you see.
This is where you learn a little bit about them because you see where there's a cross.
You know that they haven't had the education that some of the families where they've signed
their names.
And then I guess they had to move out of the villages if they wanted farms before their
fathers had given up.
And that happened with David's grandfather.
He went to St. Brides up at Magher.
And when he got married and his children were born up there, and he was farming 600 and
something acres in the 1880s and 90s.
It was tremendous.
And then eventually when they were able to, they came back down to this village.
So they just waited their time to come back to the village.
And then they moved back here.
I'm not sure about the 17, 1800s exactly who was here.
It's on my list to do.
But they came back here in 1907.
And then the family, I think there was a slight gap.
During the First World War, David's father and his brother went to war and left Neville's
father, his brother.
And one brother died.
And I think grandmother had an awful job to run the farm while the men were at war.
Wasn't that unusual?
Because we're in the reserved occupation.
In the Second World War.
Yeah.
Yeah, but no, this is the First World War.
Oh, I see.
Okay, yes.
And they didn't have the sufficient men to run the place.
So in 1919, just as the war came to a close, she sold up and went to a house they owned
down the bottom of the village, the Molens.
And it wasn't then David's father came out of the war and he had no farm.
So what happened then?
Monmouthshire County Council decided they'd let the soldiers have small holdings.
So he managed to get a small holding up at Crick as an ex-soldier.
I read my mother-in-law in Irene Green in 1924 and they farmed there for 10 years.
And this place came back on the market.
So they came back home because he'd lived here for 25 or 20 something years as a young
man.
That's amazing.
So, yes.
So what year did they return?
1934 they came back here.
And it wasn't until 1942 they could buy it when it went for sale because the Agricultural
Mortgage Corporation had received it from a farmer who went into liquidation and they
owned it for 10 years, I think.
And anyway, it was bought back and we've been here ever since.
So I get a feeling sometimes about it.
David's grandmother living here with all her children and they only had one daughter and
five sons.
And I knew Auntie Kathleen quite well and she lived here as a child.
And I still almost feel a presence in the house of a kind of warmth.
And there's an awful lot of people who have come in this house and have felt how welcoming
it can be.
Thanks for that.
It's really welcoming.
It's like coming home in the way.
And I like that feeling and it gives me great comfort.
And David said he never wants to move.
And I can understand why because I love it as much as he does.
Well, you're very welcoming too though, aren't you?
And I love the idea that coming in and tea and biscuits done properly.
I love all that.
It is.
It's almost like a ceremonial.
It's how we grew up, you see.
My mother was like it.
And it came through a lot, I think.
Yes, and David's mother.
This is something about the village people.
They were always pleased to see somebody come.
And I can remember my mother used to feed the tramps and the people used to be in the
village who had very little.
She always helped people.
And I suppose it stays with you, doesn't it?
I think it does.
I think it's ingrained, isn't it?
So is this one of the oldest houses on the level?
We think so.
I have seen it in a history book when it was called G-R-A-I-N-G-E, which would have been
the Monks' Grange, you see.
And of course they built it in stages.
It wasn't like this.
I mean it was a long house.
And the barn was obviously the first built.
And then there was a stable attached to it with a living quarters above.
And the little room, we think the back of the house was attached to it, a single, probably
a single story to start with.
And it's three stories now.
And when we had a new roof put on the house you could see where it had been hired and
hired.
Oh really?
And that's why we've got three stories at the back.
And two in the front.
Have you ever found anything while being on the farm, anything that indicates its age?
No, well the only thing that I was looking back, there were gravestones in the barn where
they used to do the winnowing.
And also a squint window within.
And I wondered if there was some sort of chapel.
And when we converted the barn I meant to rub the gravestones.
And I didn't do it and the builders had the stones up and gone before I could.
And oh I regret that so badly.
A number of times I said I must go out.
And there's a yew tree in the garden.
There's no other yew trees in this village except in Whitsun Churchyard.
Really?
That's curious isn't it?
I'd love to know how old it is.
And I wondered if there was a single cell here for a monk.
Or a hermitage I'm thinking.
Yes.
I don't know.
It does make me wonder.
And as time went on of course they built the house bigger and more impressive I guess than
a longhouse.
My father-in-law told us that, or told David, that the back of the house was the front originally
facing the sea, facing the sun.
And this garden here where the cedar tree was the orchard.
And there's still a pear tree on the back drive.
Is there really?
Yes.
So would it have the drive sweeping round maybe?
We don't know because we think the building, our dairy and old kitchen, are built on what
was originally Wainbridge Lane.
Really?
Wainbridge Lane was there.
There's still part of it down there and still part up there.
Yeah.
And we've still got the old stones where the bridges would have been.
So where did it go?
Well it would have gone from the monastery you see up to Llanwerne.
Oh goodness.
It's a direct...
Yeah.
Let me show you on the map.
Gosh.
Now, if we're here...
Yeah.
It started...
Well there's the monastery.
It would have come up.
There's the lane, look.
And it goes behind Pilfarm.
Up here, past...
Where am I now?
Past us.
So it comes up here and it went past our house.
Up here.
And we built that house there.
Yeah.
And it comes out the other side of it.
And then that road went straight on up to Llanwerne Lane.
Well has there ever been any work done on it?
I mean archaeological work on it, on the lane?
No.
Well where's Monk Stitch?
Right along it.
Well that's curious, isn't it?
Yeah.
Oh.
People don't seem to understand how important these green lanes once were.
They were the original routes.
Really?
The road here.
David's father in his lifetime remembers them making this road.
Putting the...
The one outside?
Yeah.
Putting the... breaking the rocks up to make it.
Really?
Oh yes.
So they would have mostly used green lanes to travel around the village and footpaths.
Footpaths everywhere.
What about footpaths?
There are lots of footpaths.
Oh, tremendous lot.
And we've got a couple going through here.
Do they have names?
No.
Not specific names.
So yes, so going back to the family, as they all had a lot of sons, so whenever a farm
was available they normally bought it or got tenancy of it, whichever.
And I could pinpoint on here, they lived at nearly every one.
Really?
Yes.
And the Patton Farm was David's other part of the family on his grandmother's side.
And they lived farm field and then the waters lived here, there, there, there.
You know, and you virtually looked at them all and knew family were there.
Do you have names of fields at all?
Oh yes.
Now this is another project I started in my book.
Yeah?
Yes, all our fields and I've taught the children and the grandchildren the names of all the
fields here.
Yeah.
A lot of them are obvious.
But the one that interested me most was reading about the history of villages.
Every village had a north field, which was north of the church.
And we own a north field, which is north of the church.
And that fascinated me.
Yeah.
So, ours are basically mundane, but at home we had the Crowners field.
I don't know why it was called the Crowners.
Obviously you had a pylon field and you had a shed field.
Yeah.
And we've got a moutpen.
Now that's called the moutpen because they used to have the mows in there, the hay mows.
The hay mows?
Yeah, M-O-W-S, mow.
What's that?
A rick.
I've never heard it called that before.
Oh.
Well, they used to make ricks of hay when you gathered it in loose, long before balers
obviously.
And make it into that sort of shape.
Yes, and you'd thatch the top virtually and you'd have perhaps six or eight of those and
we call them the mows.
I don't know who it was of mine.
All right.
Perhaps this local.
Okay.
So did you thatch the top with, how did you thatch the top?
I don't remember.
Because somebody was telling me that they used to go off on this bike to buy bundles.
Oh, bundles of reeds.
Yeah, to thatch the top of the rick.
Yeah, well there's reeds growing all around here.
Has there always been reeds growing in the reeds here?
I don't remember them when I was a child and David says they've colonised the place.
So we don't quite know where they've colonised us from.
But we didn't have the trouble casting the reams that we have now because they've certainly
increased over, whether it's because we've stopped using fertilisers, I don't know.
Could be.
So do you as a farmer down here Sue, what are the challenges or the delights?
So, you know, I think that the drainage, the grips, that sort of thing that maybe a farmer
elsewhere wouldn't have to deal with.
Well, over my life for farming, 55 years now, when I came here, yes, there were grips in
all the fields.
And then you had to consider the cost of draining your land to get rid of these grips.
So, we put under drainage in, we ploughed and we reseeded nearly the entire farm.
Why did you get rid of the grips?
Well, when you're farming and you've got, the machinery was improving and if you were
mowing a field, the difficulty of mowing these grips was incredible.
I'd have to go and rake back as David was mowing and they would break the machinery
because you'd go down and there were verus, you see, all the fields had verus.
So, you just needed to have flat fields for all your crops.
It made it easier for harvesting, made it easier for everything.
We filled in blind ditches.
There were often blind ditches where nothing had been done for centuries, you see.
And that mean you were then by flattening the fields?
Yes.
What did you have to do a lot then with making alternative drainage?
No, because you put an under drainage system in.
That must have been massive.
Well, it was because they would come with loads of gravel and then put the pipes.
Gosh.
And then, yes, it cost us a great deal of money, but in those days they also gave you
grants towards it.
In the 60s they were handing grants out because they were so short of food.
They wanted us to become efficient.
And that's what we did.
And we were building our dairy herd up, which was very necessary to be as efficient
as you possibly could.
And so, are there farms down here that still use that sort of system, the grip system?
Very few, very few.
There's a couple I know of, but most farmers had to do exactly the same as us
and get rid of them.
And this was the one thing that happened during the takeover for the wetlands.
Neville and some of the other farmers, John Waters and a few of them, they'd
under drained all their land and they were growing wheat, which is not so usual for
this part of the world because of the dampness.
But once you've drained, you see you can grow any crop.
And he'd done, oh, acres and acres of land down that way.
And when it was compulsory purchased and he saw them breaking up the drainage system
that he'd put in, it's enough to break your heart.
But of course, that didn't matter to them, did it?
And I think that was one of the heartbreaking things about everything coming to our
village.
It didn't matter what any farmer did, it was taken off them.
The steelworks took, what, 1500, 1800 acres?
That's a big piece of land.
Was that a shock when that came and the size of it and the scale of it?
Well, I think what really made us sit up after was in 1953, Electric came to
Whitsun and Goldcliffe.
1953?
Yeah, Whitsun, Goldcliffe and Nash.
But there were several houses that weren't offered it, like Newhouse, Greencourt,
Tatton, quite a few of them.
And that was in 1953.
Well, 1958, they announced the steelworks was coming.
And of course, it made sense because they were being bulldozed down anyway.
So they knew six years in advance of us that it was going to, it was earmarked.
So, you know, we had before that been told that Whitsun was going to build
factories here.
But because it was very, very poor land, it was virtually bogged because it was
the area where what we call the bottoms, where before the wall was built for the
sea, the water would come over, run down into the bottoms, as we called it,
fill it up, and of course it couldn't get back out.
So it was just full of old rush.
Yeah.
Whether it could have been with modern farming methods made more productive, we
do not know.
But it was an ideal site for them.
But what we didn't realize how far it would encroach into our village and take
away railway stations, our lanes, our roads, our access to other villages.
So which station did it take away?
Clan Wern was the main one because it was one mile from here.
And David always rode his bike there to catch his train to school in Newport.
And all the, during the First World War and previous to that, the trains would draw
up there and all the feed for the animals would come into the village.
The coal would come into the village.
David said his father would take his horse and cart up and collect all the coal for
the winter.
They sent all the fodder for the ponies in the First World War out by train.
Really?
From here?
Yes, from the whole of the villages.
So it was very, very important.
Yeah.
And was it just a small village as well, Clan Wern, was it?
Yes, yes.
I haven't got it on there.
But yes, I mean, it's not, it wasn't a lot bigger than what it is now, but of course
they're expanding it.
But it was a main archery for this area.
Because we people didn't want to go to Newport if you had one one mile up the road.
Yeah.
So they went.
Oh, yes.
There was a mile of road and they just took it away, built all sorts of things over it
and then took the end of the village off.
They took all the green name system out, the whole lot where we'd, you know, have gone
from one area to another.
Yeah.
And knocked some of the most beautiful farm houses down in the process.
So yes.
And people wonder when we are protective of our area.
This is why this living levels is suddenly bringing, it's almost 50 years too late.
Do you know what I'm saying?
Why, oh why did they constantly want our villages when it was such a beautiful little area?
It wasn't beauty by the standards of the Cotswold villages or anything like that.
It's got its own beauty though, hasn't it?
It had something special about it.
But the minute they started putting dozens of modern houses into it, it lost its character
as far as I was concerned.
So was there was a mixed feeling towards Langwurming because it bought work, didn't it?
Yes.
But of course then, although it brought work, it doubled Newport, the size of Newport.
It made it less of an attractive town.
We had caravan sites put, our schools filled up and they were plonked in the centre of
the village.
And I can remember the school was overwhelmed.
Really?
Yeah, they had to put another part of the school into being.
Which is Nash School?
Yes.
They had to bring in what you call portable buildings.
Oh really?
Yes.
Because somebody told me that at High Cornwall there was a camp there for Irish Navvies.
Yes, that's it.
Yes, they all came over and looked to work.
But they had to have a place to send their children to school.
So we got it.
And then there was another camp put there for experimental something or other to do
the steelworks.
I forgot what they called it.
And that's just an overgrown field now.
Nobody could even get in there, I doubt.
So did you feel the effects here?
What sort of changes did you feel?
The worst was going to school.
And we would catch the bus to go to school.
And within ten minutes of being on the bus, the bus would be stationary and crawling
for an hour and we would miss our convent bus.
So you got out of the bus after three miles and you walked the other two to get your bus.
Because there were so many shale lorries and we only had one bridge in Newport.
Of course.
The main bridge next to the railway bridge.
And it was totally snarled up.
So they decided they'd built George Street Bridge.
But of course it was too late for the use of the ship, you know, to stop all this happening.
And that was a horrible feeling that everything started to change.
And we had no control whatsoever.
And there was no previous thought of the infrastructure at all.
So you must have been delighted with the news of the implore coming through?
This time?
I don't think it made a lot of difference to us.
Obviously it would have been half a mile or more away and we wouldn't have wanted it.
But I do think Newport needs help.
Because I don't think people fully realize what a problem Newport has.
I wish they'd find some solution to it.
I don't think also that the people who were against it coming for the habitat and so forth
fully realize that we have had this happen so many times.
With the power station, with the ash ponds, Llanwerne.
The habitat has been eroded in those areas.
But the wildlife will move around and they will, you know, thrive wherever.
Because we have found that with the fact that we had, from farming very intensively
and all the slurry we used to put on the land.
We didn't have a lot of wildlife at that time.
But since, we have got far more wildlife here than you ever see down the wetlands.
That's curious really.
It is.
We always had a heronry on the farm.
Herons, swans, ducks, owls, every type of bird.
Hairs.
And you know, they're thriving.
We've had fields of lapwings and the swans are with us and have them young every year.
But then they've been here for the last, you know, ever since I came.
Because you read some stories, people compare this to the Amazon for its, you know, diversity.
Yeah.
But I can't see, as far as I'm concerned, everything has come back that once didn't thrive perhaps
where we were farming intensively.
And it's all come back.
I mean, how many people can hear the owls in their trees at night?
And we've got them on the farm.
No, there's nothing, you know, I've got wild ducks that come in the garden.
And every year you see the swans teaching the signets to fly up our orchard.
Delight.
It's amazing.
So, no, I find it difficult to believe that it's the same when they lock the gates at the wetlands.
You mustn't walk through there whilst the birds are breeding.
How do they think farming works when we are making haze, silage?
I can walk through one of the fields and you'll hear the birds singing and they'll go quiet.
But you know they've got young or eggs in there or whatever.
But they'll fly back in as soon as you've gone.
I mean, that must seem kind of strange, people around here, to be told it's almost as if you don't know your land or how nature works.
Yes.
And you've got some experts coming in saying you'd better listen to us.
That must be a bit frustrating.
Oh, it is terribly frustrating.
And I found that really, really hard down the seawall where we've gone all our lives to walk where we wanted to go and suddenly you've got padlocks.
And I would get over the gates and take no notice because I was thinking I know more about it than what they do.
But then they put barbed wire and you can't do that.
And you think this is absolutely dreadful.
Do they think that wildlife takes any notice of human beings?
They don't.
We've coexisted for so long, haven't we?
Yes.
It's respecting one group over another, isn't it, really?
And perhaps you've been able to glean a picture a little bit of how anxious I have felt through my life that they're going to take more and more of us.
Yeah.
And destroy what was here.
Well, I think it's obvious why you would be anxious about that because so much has been taken, hasn't it, really?
I'm very anti-development.
Well, you've seen enough of it to be anti-it, haven't you?
Yes.
Yet there is an idyll here still, isn't there, I feel, when I come to...
Well, I find it more in Whitsun than I do in Nash because I lost that idyll a long time ago when they built all around our house.
But I'm already incredibly aware that you're a very modest woman, but you've done some fantastic work recording history locally.
Why have you taken it upon yourself to do that?
And what things have you learnt and researched that have thrilled you or amazed you or whatever?
I... It's a job to define.
I don't know why I suddenly became... I used to always listen to the old people.
I used to like sitting quiet and taking it all in, so to speak.
My father used to say, oh, she's got her ears flapping again.
And they were right.
We had an old gentleman who used to come to the house.
He lived up the road, Mr. Lamprey.
And he was bristly and he used to ride his bike down.
And he loved coming to see my mother and he'd sit in the rocking chair while she was cooking or doing something.
And he was a herbalist.
Herbalist?
Yes.
And he'd come and he'd say now, I think...
And in those days everybody called Mrs. This or Mr. That.
Now Mrs. Collymore.
I've brought you some nettles today and perhaps if I tell you how we'll make some nettle soup.
I don't know where my mother wished him to.
But he never stopped coming and he always had some ideas about...
That used to fascinate me.
I don't know.
There was things I used to take on board, I guess.
And then suddenly I thought, well, I used to say to the old people, will you tell me or will you talk?
Like Mr. German, who was the local blacksmith.
His memories went way back, probably to the beginning of the century.
I think he must have been born about 1912 or something like that.
And now what do you want to know, my dear?
Things like that used to happen and I didn't record it.
I just remember some of it.
And we had an old gentleman, Andrew Greenhouse, who lived opposite us here.
He knew everything and I didn't record it.
So at one stage I thought, you see, when I was farming I had an awfully busy life.
Running this place, I had children.
I used to work for Cruz Bereavement Care, 20 hours a week.
And that was voluntary.
I used to help run the church.
And we were a big family, always visiting somebody in the family who needed something or other.
My mother became very ill and I had to look after her.
There was an awful lot going on.
And it wasn't probably until 2000.
I used to help my girls run their businesses because one was a ceramicist and the other made clothes and whatever.
So there was all that going on and the cows, which took most of our life up.
And I started writing my book of my life story, thinking, well, this would be nice for the grandchildren
to know a little bit about when I used to say we had no hot water in the house.
We didn't have a bathroom. We didn't have electric.
And this was our life.
And my word, we were happy.
It never made any difference to us.
My mother created a wonderful home with very little.
My father and mother worked hard with the business to afford to pay for the four of us to go to private school,
which must, looking back, have been a great sacrifice for them.
But they thought maybe it would do us good.
There was all sorts of things that made me realize that we had a different life to other people.
And I guess I started writing it down because my own family, it was such a large family,
all very interesting people who did things that you didn't hear about other people doing.
So you've written that, have you Sue?
Not all of it. No, no, nothing like.
I've got quite a few chapters under my belt.
But I want to do the detail, you see, and that's what takes the time.
And then as soon as you think of something, then you're reminded of something else, I'm sure.
You just can't encompass it all.
It's in exhaustive, isn't it, just trying to get it all done.
Yes. And then we're coming from generation to generation.
But mostly I wanted to write about my farming life and how it evolved
because it saw huge differences from beginning to end like my father did.
Yeah. So you have taken it upon yourself to maybe record your community.
Oh, yes. My community is in my book.
All the people, who they were, what they did and how we lived.
Who was Hubert Jones?
Hubert Jones. Well, you see, his family, the Joneses, I don't know how far they go back,
but I know it's hundreds of years.
And again, they had their own land.
So if people had their own land, they stayed.
He was one of several boys.
I don't quite know how many.
His daughter, Lynn, lives in Redwick,
and she gave me access to all his papers that he'd written.
And he had been writing his history since I would think he was about 30 or 40.
So his memories went right back to the beginning of the 1900s.
And he sketched. He would go.
He didn't drive, but he would go by bus into the library and he would order books.
And they always sent them by post so that he would read his book
and then correspond with the head librarian, send them back.
So everything he wrote or copied, rather, to do with the history was factual.
He didn't do a bibliography as such,
but he wrote down which book it had come out of so that I know that it's not fiction.
And then he was writing, and I can show you.
I have written stuff myself, which has copied down a lot of his memories.
This is what's fascinated me, what he can tell us.
You see, there's Broad Street Common in the parish of Goukli,
and the land was once part of the estate of the College of Eden.
Now, his diction wasn't terribly good.
He was not terribly good at putting words into sentences, if you know what I mean.
And he was very clever, but I've sort of rewritten what he had done
so that it makes perhaps a little more sense to people listening these days.
It would have made more sense to him at the time when he was writing it.
And here he's like, I remember.
So everything's I remember.
And this was the fascinating bit.
I'll just read the first bit.
I remember there had been talk of a large docks being built on the Nash side of the River Usk.
However, it did not materialize as the 1914-18 War changed everything,
putting an end to all the dreams of new prosperity.
And there had long been speculation before of another railway line from Seven Tunnel
across the Caldecott levels to the mouth of the Usk.
However, this idea did not come to fruition,
and many people who had speculated on the project burnt their fingers.
And it goes on then to explain who it was and how they'd got it.
What a fantastic document.
And then, yes, and there are names like the Brewer Williams,
and they're connected to David's family.
And I know where they fit into the history in Newport.
Wow.
And yes, there's all these names.
And the thing is, I knew these people.
Yeah, you can make the connections, can't you?
Yes.
And you can also give them context.
I know who they married, who their families were.
And if that...
You're going to have to do a huge wall chart, aren't you,
with all these, you know, locations and then family trees associated with them.
Yes.
The interesting thing was when I was doing the soldiers,
and I think there were 70 or more or less, for the exhibition,
I found it fascinating when I looked back into their past,
how this went round and round in circles,
all the intermarrying, because they couldn't go out of the village.
They had kind of married into their community.
Oh, yes, yeah.
And very often they were first or second cousins.
Yeah, it's just a wonder there weren't more problems locally.
So what did Hubert do? Was he a farmer?
Well, his father was, and some of his brothers were,
but he chose to work for the river board, you see.
Really?
So he was maintaining a lot of the waterways.
So he knew virtually everything that was going on locally.
Did you ever meet him?
Oh, yes, I knew him. Not a lot.
But I remember him going round giving talks,
and people used to call him the local historian.
Really?
Yes.
It's almost like he's passed on the mantle to you.
Well, I feel that he and I would have got on really well.
Yeah.
Yes. I mean, this is a little bit about down on the wharf.
Who built the tavern? And this is the windbound.
We do not know, as like its owners, it is lost in history and forgotten.
It was a very old house. Now, I have a drawing of it.
Nobody else has, but I've drawn it from a sketch he did.
Yeah.
When I knew it, yes, it was a very old house when I knew it,
and was built possibly about 1700.
It was fairly isolated and was on its own,
but there would possibly have been a group of old fishermen's huts
there sometime previously.
It appeared to be in fairly good condition when I remember it.
Whitewashed with four largest rooms downstairs
and two large bedrooms in the front, looking out across the river.
And so it goes on.
And Lyn Jones from Nash, her family lived there.
Yeah.
So why?
So, and she didn't even know a lot of what I read at the meeting.
Really?
Yeah.
It's just fantastic document to have, but you have transcribed it.
It's there for the record now, isn't it?
Yes.
While it's being lost and thrown into some stick.
Yeah, I was just wondering where I got to in the end.
Yeah.
Every, everything I've written is, and again,
I don't know if you've heard of Dr. William Price.
No.
Well, he was the one that introduced cremation in this country.
Oh, my word, you don't know anything if you don't know about Dr. William Price.
Oh, my goodness.
But he was very, I wrote the history of the farmer's arms in Goldil.
And he was very much connected to that.
How was he connected to that?
He used to come to the village and stay and he used to, he was a doctor.
Yeah.
And he used to heal people and treat them free because they were poor.
And he would stay in the farmer's arms.
Really?
Yes.
So, you know, I've written bits and pieces.
Oh, my goodness me.
Yeah.
Extraordinary stuff, Sue.
So.
Oh, my God.
Look how lovely I've written.
What gorgeous writing.
I don't know.
I don't write at all like that.
When I'm writing, I just do, you know, free fall, as we call it,
and trying to write the history of Whitsun, the Philipses of Whitsun House.
Did you ever go there with the zoo?
Oh, yes.
Did you ever go there with your children?
Oh, I was friendly with Mrs. Mabry.
I used to spend a lot of time with her.
Did you?
She and I struck up a lovely friendship.
Yeah.
And she, yes, when the children were little, she had the zoo.
So I would push them over in the push chair.
And I obviously sit by her and talk to her.
She was interesting.
Yeah.
And she, we could set up a conversation, again, a little bit about history.
And, yeah, we used to talk for a little.
And as the children grew up, she used to say, well, you come over whenever you want and bring your friends.
So they never had to pay.
And then as time went on, I would go and sit with her afternoons and keep her company.
And she'd make sure we had a lovely tea on the front or something.
And, of course, she was a bit of a benefactress.
So we used to have fundraising events for the church there.
And she'd say, right, you can have the house as long as you clean it before and after.
So we did.
And we had beautiful events there.
And what was the motivation behind the zoo?
Well, somebody gave her one or two things to look after.
And it just seemed to grow.
People were always giving her things.
And then eventually, I suppose she thought, well, I might just as well have a bit of a zoo.
And she had local people who made cages and so forth.
And it just grew.
I can remember one night we had a church meeting there.
And the lion was on the settee.
And she said, well, will you wait a minute while I put the lion back in its cage?
That was quite funny.
I mean, it's hello.
Stopped by and she said, oh, she said, I've lost a snake.
Have you seen it anywhere?
I looked at her and I said, well, no, is it poisonous?
Oh, no, she said, it crushes you to death.
That made us laugh.
Thankfully, I don't know what, I'm sure they recaptured it or something.
Could you hear the lions roaring?
Yes, especially in the summer.
We'd have our windows up because we sleep in the front.
And you'd have this roaring through the night because they didn't like the discomfort of the heat.
But I would have thought they would be bred into that.
And peacocks.
She always had peacocks and they'd scream as well.
And monkeys as well.
Yes, but we didn't hear the monkeys.
It's hilarious, really.
Yes.
I'm very conscious.
I've been here a long time.
Sorry, Sue. You're just so fascinating.
It doesn't matter.
Are you too young to remember the war?
The war.
Second World War.
Oh, yeah. I wasn't born till after it finished in 1945.
So do you remember the winter of 63?
Oh, gosh, yes.
Yes.
What was it like here?
Oh, horrendous.
Horrendous.
Here, well, and I remember especially the 83 one, and I took pictures and film of the 83 one here.
But 63, people couldn't move around.
And it stayed from Boxing Day until March almost.
And here especially, all the water froze.
And they were trying to get specialist people to come and unfreeze the water under the pill and came in under the pill.
Because that would have been particularly here.
Yes. The only water supply in the house, we had a huge water tank in the attic.
And they would carry churns of water up there every day to fill it.
And I think David had probably 50 head of cattle in the sheds.
And they drink, I don't know how many, 25 gallons a day.
And they had to carry water from the pill, because it was a running stream, up to the sheds every day.
There was an Italian man working here at the time.
And most of their day was taken up between milkings and just hauling water.
And it was cruel, you know.
There was ice on every reen.
Gosh.
You couldn't turn the cattle out anyway, which you wouldn't have done.
So, oh no.
David, he could talk for ages on that.
It was horrendous.
And the drought of 76, was that equally as bad?
Oh, terrible for us. Terrible.
We always reared all our heifers, because heifers were very expensive to buy in 76.
So we had about 23.
Now, we would have had 70 or 80 cows at the time.
And there was no fodder in the winter.
In the summer there was no grass for them.
And we had to feed straw, because it was the only thing we had.
We had to keep what hay we had for the winter feed.
Was straw not a good thing to feed, Kathy?
No, it hurts their mouths.
Oh, really? Yeah.
So we went into silage in those days.
It hadn't taken off.
And we'd taken land all over the place.
We always had to buy 100 acres, very nearly, of grass keep, as we call it.
And we had some at Katzash, up at Harry Ross's.
Oh, I don't know where else.
We had some at Wilcric.
We had some at Redwick.
And our cattle were starving.
We had to feed them straw.
So you'd have to go all over the place with your trailer full of straw to feed these every day.
And when it came to the time we had nothing left, we had to sell our heifers.
Oh, God. It was that desperate?
It was desperate.
And I think our neighbor bought most of them in market.
And that set us back farming-wise for years.
Oh, gosh.
You know, because you have a three-year cycle with your heifer to cow.
Yeah.
We lost a lot of money.
But there was no recompense for farmers who had lost money in any circumstances.
So, yes.
Foot and mouth were different crises then.
Yes, foot and mouth didn't affect us here.
I can remember we had all the signs up and we had disinfectant.
There was one in 1966 we had.
And that was a bit closer to us.
But the 90 whatever one didn't affect us.
At all.
Sorry, Sue. I'll bring it to an end very soon.
You'll be delighted to hear.
I just wondered about...
Oh, I'm loving it.
Oh, are you?
Oh, good, because I am too.
Newport. Would you consider Newport to be part of the levels?
No, not from Liswery onwards.
Once the land starts to rise at Liswery towards Summerton, towards Chepster Road, the land rises.
No. Up as far as Summerton.
And you can imagine it's got its name from the fact that it was the summer grazing grounds.
It doesn't look like spelling the same.
But David will tell you his father remembers that farmed right up as far as what we call Corporation Road where the bridges are.
And they go over.
And that would have been flat up to there.
And that would have been levels going back 150 years.
So no, we wouldn't consider...
Once we get up through Liswery, we don't think of it any longer as being part of the Moors as we called it.
So was Newport the place where you would go shopping or livestock market?
Oh, yes, yes.
The fresh fruit and veg market?
Oh, definitely. On a Wednesday, the farmers would go to market.
Their wives didn't drive, so the wives went.
And I remember all my aunts who were farmers' wives who had all meeting Newport.
Every shop, every building was a shop with something that people needed.
And the market was a hive of industry.
Griffin Street, where our shop was, was alive with shops.
And people could park anywhere.
I remember we used to park outside the town hall where the clock was because the bank was next door.
I remember feeding the babies in the car.
We used to take hot water flasks to feed.
And you met everybody. You bumped into people.
There was every type of business you could imagine.
Expensive jewellery shops, beautiful cafes, all with different character of their own.
And you always had a second story like the Cardoma where you could look down into the street and see what's around.
Beautiful dress shops, lovely stores.
I can remember one shop EG Taylor where they had a machine that took your money and it flew right across the shop on a chain.
And it came out the other end and then you had to change back and unscrew these little pots and your money would be in it.
So, yeah, beautiful shoe shops, wonderful tailors, bespoke tailors as well.
I can remember my father having his coats made with this bespoke tailor and his shoes.
He used to wear britches up to his knees.
Britches, no, what do you call them?
Leggings.
Leggings up to the top of his britches.
That wood button.
Yes, that's it.
He used to wear those and sports coats he'd have made.
Yellow waistcoats.
And my mother used to have her suits tailored.
Oh yes, Newport was alive and gorgeous properties like the town hall and the library and everything.
And they just knocked it all down.
And the Lyceum Theatre with these wonderful structure with all these pillars, a bit like Covent Garden, the Opera House.
And I can remember my mother taking me to pantomimes there and seeing ice skating on ice in those days.
There were music halls, there were dance places.
It was just wonderful.
And we used to have a carnival and we'd be taken in and you'd sit on the windows of the bank or something and wait for the carnival to go past.
It was huge.
But the population of Newport wouldn't have been any more than about 25,000 in those days, maybe 30.
And now we're looking at 100 and not 1000.
It sounds like it was a thriving place.
Oh it was.
But you had lots of industry and the docks were huge then too, weren't they?
Yes, there was industry down there and of course there was Lysats and all the other places, all of that.
But the farmers would stand market Fridays and Saturdays and the market, at the top of the market you had this huge floor
where all the farmers would have their chicken and their produce, their butter and their cream all the way round.
And our shop was absolutely thriving in Griffin Street because people could pull up outside the market opposite the shop.
We had mobile shops that used to go around the villages on a Tuesday.
Oh really?
They would deliver all the meat on a Saturday for people's roasts in all the villages.
So all my aunts and uncles worked in this business.
So it was one of the bigger butchers' shops in Newport.
And yes, and I was told many stories by many people that during the war,
my grandfather used to supply an awful lot of businesses with meat.
But on a Saturday night, there were a lot of people down the pill area and the poorer areas of Newport who didn't have money
and the kids would be without shoes and so forth.
And my grandfather would hold an auction on a Saturday night because they had no cold stores you see.
So all the meat that was killed had to be got rid of.
So he'd auction off this meat and he used to make sure he'd auction it off to people for nothing.
So they had meat for Sundays.
Wow.
If anybody came up with, looked a bit poor, he would make sure they had.
And one day I was with the NFU doing a stand-up job in Newport Square
trying to present to people what farmers could produce.
So we wanted them to know that we were still around producing their food.
And a little old lady came along and we got talking.
And she said, oh, I've always bought my stuff in the market and I liked fresh food.
And she said, and there was an old gentleman, Mr. Collymore, when we were children, we couldn't afford meat.
And my mother used to come and take us children down there and we'd always have something for Sunday.
And I thought, oh, well, that story was true.
Oh, that's lovely, isn't it?
It was nice to hear.
Yeah, yeah, to have it confirmed by a third party as well.
Yes, because a lot of people used to talk about it and I never knew for sure until this lady.
I thought, what a coincidence that I should talk to her.
Do you know places like Redwick and Furtherfield, Mega and Rocket?
Do you consider them, they consider themselves to be the Moors?
They talk about the Moors.
Yeah.
Do you from here consider them to be the Moors?
Oh, yes, yes.
And so is there any relation to them or are all the villages here quite separate?
I think we've become more related of latter years since the children have been going to Mega school from this area.
Oh, OK.
And you get to know all the mums and whatever.
We've always connected from the farming point of view because a lot of my relatives and a lot of David's relatives live in those areas, in all those villages.
When I was at school and my friends lived over that area, I was often staying up there.
And I remember the hunt coming into the square at Mega.
And it was just a tiny little village, Mega was, when we were children.
That you'd walk down to from whoever's home you were staying at.
Yeah.
And I suppose we've seen that grow into almost a town size.
And that's strange.
It's changed everything.
And the road system round.
When they came and put Tesco's there, that change started to change Mega and the brewery and all of that.
So, yes, we still feel relatively.
And of latter years we've become a ministry area, a benefits area.
But through the churches, for the last 30, perhaps 35 years, I've been connected with all the churches out there through my work.
Yeah.
And you get to know more people.
So, I have felt connected for a very long time.
And I'm sure there are other people like me.
Maybe not many, but some of us have been involved with church life in that particular area.
Would you say it's still strong here, too, church life?
No, nothing like it was.
No.
No, it's quite sad.
Our congregation has dwindled with age.
And, yes, it is a huge change.
So, perhaps we could talk about that again sometime.
Yeah.
I'm just very excited about the time because...
Do you have other appointments now?
No, for you.
I mean, what time is it, Sue?
Oh, it's 25 to 2.
Yes.
So, I've got one at 2.30.
So, is there anything else you'd like to add?
I have so much I'd like to add, but perhaps we could do more another time.
Yeah.
Should I turn this off now?
Mm-hmm.